Add tutorial: Compiler Explorer Deployment (#109)
bemanproject/beman: tutorials/compiler-explorer-deployment.md

<!--
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

# Tutorial: Compiler Explorer Deployment

Full instructins are available at [compiler-explorer: Adding a new library](https://github.com/compiler-explorer/compiler-explorer/blob/main/docs/AddingALibrary.md). This page is a Beman cheatsheet.

## Integrating a header-only library

### Step by step example: `beman.optional`

> 1. Clone Compiler Explorer repos: <https://github.com/compiler-explorer/infra> and <https://github.com/compiler-explorer/compiler-explorer>.

Reviewer: I feel it would be easier to have the commands in bash as well, I think everything should be copy paste to be able to quickly follow the content.

Author: done

> 1. Clone Compiler Explorer repos: <https://github.com/compiler-explorer/infra> and <https://github.com/compiler-explorer/compiler-explorer>.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Clone Compiler Explorer repos:

```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/compiler-explorer/infra
$ git clone https://github.com/compiler-explorer/compiler-explorer
```

   2.1. Locate an existing Beman library inside `bin/yaml/libraries.yaml` - e.g. search for `repo: bemanproject/optional`.

   2.2. Add a new entry (keeping Beman entries grouped and sorted):

```yml
beman_optional:
  build_type: none
  check_file: README.md
  method: nightlyclone
  repo: bemanproject/optional
  targets:
  - main
  type: github
```

Notes:

* `build_type: none`: Not required to run a build command (header-only libraries).
* `check_file: README.md`: The platform checks the hash of this file.
* `method: nightlyclone`: Do a deployment every day. We don't want and don't need more often deployment.
* `repo: bemanproject/optional`: Clone and deploy `beman.optional` from <https://github.com/bemanproject/optional>.
* `target: ... main`: Only deploy main as trunk version.
* `type: github`: The repo will be always clone with latest version.

  2.3. Deploy local `infra/` instance. For header-only libraries, it's enough to just run:

```bash
# Create default deployment directory and make sure to set write permissions for your user.
$ mkdir -p /opt/compiler-explorer
$ ls -l /opt/                  
drwxr-xr-x  25 dariusn  wheel   800 Apr  7 21:29 compiler-explorer

> $ compiler-infra [main] make ce

Reviewer: ```suggestion 
$ make ce
```

`complier-infra [main]` seem like extra information that we don't need.

Author: done

$ compiler-infra [main] bin/ce_install --enable nightly install beman_optional
...
 2025-04-07 23:05:07,137 lib.ce_install  INFO     libraries/c++/nightly/beman_optional main installed OK
1 packages installed OK, 0 skipped, and 0 failed installation
```

> Notes: Tested on `MacOS` and `Ubuntu`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notes: Tested on `MacOS` and `Ubuntu`.
```

Can you specify Ubuntu version?

Author: done

libs=beman_optional                                                                            # The list of libraries separated by colons, e.g. beman_optional

libs.beman_optional.name=beman.optional                                                         # The name of the library.
libs.beman_optional.versions=trunk                                                              # The version of the library, always trunk for now.  
libs.beman_optional.url=https://github.com/bemanproject/optional                                # The URL of the library.
libs.beman_optional.versions.trunk.version=trunk                                                # The version of the library, always trunk for now.
libs.beman_optional.versions.trunk.path=/opt/compiler-explorer/libs/beman_optional/main/include # The path to the library.
```

  3.2. Start local deployment:

```bash
$ compiler-explorer [main] $ make
...
info:   Listening on http://localhost:10240/
...
```

  3.3. Go to <http://localhost:10240/> and try to compile a code which includes your library, e.g.:

```cpp
#include <beman/optional/optional.hpp>

int main() { return beman::optional<int>{}.empty(); }
```

> <img width="1725" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/afe0abd8-e92e-40c2-8843-7b7011092650" />

Reviewer: Should we store this image somewhere in the repo?

  3.4. Go to `Include libs`:

> <img width="1727" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/102c5da5-d48d-4331-a741-4a5bbf5c607b" />

Reviewer: Should we store this image somewhere in the repo?

Reviewer: I am not sure how it will work if you try to edit / follow this tutorial without internet connection? I would prefer all the images will be in the repo, as static content.

Also, I think it will also help for future integration of the website to store the images as static content.

Author: > I am not sure how it will work if you try to edit / follow this tutorial without internet connection? I would prefer all the images will be in the repo, as static content.

How can you do the tutorial without internet? Cloning and building CE requires lots of packages to be downloaded.

> Also, I think it will also help for future integration of the website to store the images as static content.

Why? The website will serve same current md file and it will be rendered with internet access, right? Can you test with your template, please?

Reviewer: > How can you do the tutorial without internet? Cloning and building CE requires lots of packages to be downloaded.

I was referring more about going through the tutorial (e.g. : If you have all repos downloaded and you can run the initial version of the website as well as the beman libraries, you can still follow most of the parts of the tutorial without internet)  

>  The website will serve same current md file and it will be rendered with internet access, right? Can you test with your template, please?

Yes, it works, but I still feel more natural to have all the information of the repo inside the repo and not using any external dependency for storing images.  If I understood correctly, these links are associated with your user's Github profile (for example - "https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/102c5da5-d48d-4331-a741-4a5bbf5c607b redirects me to https://github-production-user-asset-6210df.s3.amazonaws.com/8947836/431077706-102c5da5-d48d-4331-a741-4a5bbf5c607b.png?X-Amz-Algorithm=AWS4-HMAC-SHA256&X-Amz-Credential=AKIAVCODYLSA53PQK4ZA%2F20250408%2Fus-east-1%2Fs3%2Faws4_request&X-Amz-Date=20250408T122632Z&X-Amz-Expires=300&X-Amz-Signature=5ff6553154cc96017119d5b7ac9d9745567093ab175cf33c5eac499473f96653&X-Amz-SignedHeaders=host which contains your github ID - 8947836  and I am not quite sure how easy are they transferable to the organization. Extra argument here would be that they are not versioned controlled.

libs.benchmark.name=Google Benchmark
...
```

  3.8. Commit `etc/config/c++.amazon.properties`. Commit and push the changes upstream! (PR instructions at step 4)

4. Open PRs:
   4.1. Open issues in Compiler Explorer repo. Example: <https://github.com/compiler-explorer/compiler-explorer/issues/6651>.

   4.2.: Open PR with change from `bin/yaml/libraries.yaml` in <https://github.com/compiler-explorer/infra>. Commit example: <https://github.com/compiler-explorer/infra/commit/96d504ac2d39212d22fc3dc5f8c7be3909457d29>.

   4.3.: Open PR with change from `etc/config/c++.amazon.properties` in <https://github.com/compiler-explorer/compiler-explorer>. Commit example: <https://github.com/compiler-explorer/compiler-explorer/commit/738fd3b0c5979677e56d3550526efe2eaaa6f2fe>.

   4.4. Link both PRs to your CE issue and to your Beman issue.

   4.5. Ping CE owners for review (first landed PR should be done in the infra repo).

### Header-only library, but a processing step is required - example: `beman.iterator_interface`

Instructions are similar to previous section, but a build command neededs to be run to properly generate final deployable header.

> For example, to deploy / install `beman.iterator_interface` on Compiler Explorer, we follow previous steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, to deploy / install `beman.iterator_interface` on Compiler Explorer, we follow the previous steps:
```

  package_install: true
  method: nightlyclone
  repo: bemanproject/iterator_interface
  staticliblink:
  - beman.iterator_interface
  targets:
  - main
  type: github
...
beman_optional:
  build_type: none
```

Notes:

* `build_type: cmake`: Run a cmake command.
* `extra_cmake_arg:`: Pass arguments to cmake, e.g. disable building tests (`-DBUILD_TESTING=OFF`).
* `lib_type: static`: Generate a static library.
* `package_install: true`: Install build artifacts.

* Updates in `compiler-explorer/etc/config/c++.amazon.properties`:

```yaml
...
libs=...:beman_iterator_interface:beman_optional:...
...
libs.beman_iterator_interface.name=beman.iterator_interface
libs.beman_iterator_interface.versions=trunk
libs.beman_iterator_interface.url=https://github.com/bemanproject/iterator_interface
libs.beman_iterator_interface.packagedheaders=true
libs.beman_iterator_interface.staticliblink=beman.iterator_interface
libs.beman_iterator_interface.versions.trunk.version=trunk
libs.beman_iterator_interface.versions.trunk.lookupversion=main
...
```

* Same testing instructions as per [Integrating a header only library](#integrating-a-header-only-library).

## Non header-only library

> Currently, we don't have usages for such Beman libraries. We'll update the cheatsheet with instructions from [compiler-explorer: Adding a new library](https://github.com/compiler-explorer/compiler-explorer/blob/main/docs/AddingALibrary.md) when the first Beman example will be available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, there are no such usages for such Beman libraries. 
```

I would keep it simple, I don't think it is necessarily to mention that the guide will be updated when we have more stuff.

<!--
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

# Tutorial: Compiler Explorer Deployment

Full instructins are available at [compiler-explorer: Adding a new library](https://github.com/compiler-explorer/compiler-explorer/blob/main/docs/AddingALibrary.md). This page is a Beman cheatsheet.

## Integrating a header-only library

### Step by step example: `beman.optional`

1. Clone Compiler Explorer repos:

```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/compiler-explorer/infra

> $ git clone https://github.com/compiler-explorer/compiler-explorer

Author: ```suggestion
$ git clone https://github.com/compiler-explorer/compiler-explorer
```
```

   2.1. Locate an existing Beman library inside `bin/yaml/libraries.yaml` - e.g. search for `repo: bemanproject/optional`.

   2.2. Add a new entry (keeping Beman entries grouped and sorted):

```yml
beman_optional:
  build_type: none
  check_file: README.md
  method: nightlyclone
  repo: bemanproject/optional
  targets:
  - main
  type: github
```

Notes:

* `build_type: none`: Not required to run a build command (header-only libraries).
* `check_file: README.md`: The platform checks the hash of this file.
* `method: nightlyclone`: Do a deployment every day. We don't want and don't need more often deployment.
* `repo: bemanproject/optional`: Clone and deploy `beman.optional` from <https://github.com/bemanproject/optional>.
* `target: ... main`: Only deploy main as trunk version.
* `type: github`: The repo will be always clone with latest version.

  2.3. Deploy local `infra/` instance. For header-only libraries, it's enough to just run:

```bash
# Create default deployment directory and make sure to set write permissions for your user.
$ mkdir -p /opt/compiler-explorer
$ ls -l /opt/                  
drwxr-xr-x  25 dariusn  wheel   800 Apr  7 21:29 compiler-explorer

> $ compiler-infra [main] make ce

Author: ```suggestion
$ cd compiler-infra/
$ make ce
```

   2.2. Add a new entry (keeping Beman entries grouped and sorted):

```yml
beman_optional:
  build_type: none
  check_file: README.md
  method: nightlyclone
  repo: bemanproject/optional
  targets:
  - main
  type: github
```

Notes:

* `build_type: none`: Not required to run a build command (header-only libraries).
* `check_file: README.md`: The platform checks the hash of this file.
* `method: nightlyclone`: Do a deployment every day. We don't want and don't need more often deployment.
* `repo: bemanproject/optional`: Clone and deploy `beman.optional` from <https://github.com/bemanproject/optional>.
* `target: ... main`: Only deploy main as trunk version.
* `type: github`: The repo will be always clone with latest version.

  2.3. Deploy local `infra/` instance. For header-only libraries, it's enough to just run:

```bash
# Create default deployment directory and make sure to set write permissions for your user.
$ mkdir -p /opt/compiler-explorer
$ ls -l /opt/                  
drwxr-xr-x  25 dariusn  wheel   800 Apr  7 21:29 compiler-explorer

$ cd infra/
$ make ce

> $ compiler-infra [main] bin/ce_install --enable nightly install beman_optional

Author: ```suggestion
$ bin/ce_install --enable nightly install beman_optional
```

...
 2025-04-07 23:05:07,137 lib.ce_install  INFO     libraries/c++/nightly/beman_optional main installed OK
1 packages installed OK, 0 skipped, and 0 failed installation
```

> Notes: Tested on `MacOS` and `Ubuntu`.

Author: ```suggestion
Notes: Tested on `MacOS 14.6` (aarch64) and `Ubuntu 24.04` (aarch64).
```

  3.1. Locate or create `etc/config/c++.local.properties`. Add your entry according to Compiler Explorer docs (examples also in `etc/config/c++.amazon.properties`). For example, for adding `beman.optional` from step 2, do this:

```yml
# Installed libs (see c++.amazon.properties for production examples)
libs=beman_optional                                                                            # The list of libraries separated by colons, e.g. beman_optional

libs.beman_optional.name=beman.optional                                                         # The name of the library.
libs.beman_optional.versions=trunk                                                              # The version of the library, always trunk for now.  
libs.beman_optional.url=https://github.com/bemanproject/optional                                # The URL of the library.
libs.beman_optional.versions.trunk.version=trunk                                                # The version of the library, always trunk for now.
libs.beman_optional.versions.trunk.path=/opt/compiler-explorer/libs/beman_optional/main/include # The path to the library.
```

  3.2. Start local deployment:

```bash

> $ compiler-explorer [main] $ make

Author: ```suggestion
$ cd compiler-explorer/
$ make
```

* `method: nightlyclone`: Do a deployment every day. We don't want and don't need more often deployment.
* `repo: bemanproject/optional`: Clone and deploy `beman.optional` from <https://github.com/bemanproject/optional>.
* `target: ... main`: Only deploy main as trunk version.
* `type: github`: The repo will be always clone with latest version.

  2.3. Deploy local `infra/` instance. For header-only libraries, it's enough to just run:

```bash
# Create default deployment directory and make sure to set write permissions for your user.
$ mkdir -p /opt/compiler-explorer
$ ls -l /opt/                  
drwxr-xr-x  25 dariusn  wheel   800 Apr  7 21:29 compiler-explorer

$ cd infra/
$ make ce
$ bin/ce_install --enable nightly install beman_optional
...
 2025-04-07 23:05:07,137 lib.ce_install  INFO     libraries/c++/nightly/beman_optional main installed OK
1 packages installed OK, 0 skipped, and 0 failed installation
```

Notes: Tested on `MacOS 14.6` (aarch64) and `Ubuntu 24.04` (aarch64).

  2.4. On success, you can find the new Beman library deployed on local setup in `/opt/compiler-explorer`. E.g., for `beman.optional` installation should see this tree:

```bash

> $ tree /opt/compiler-explorer/libs/beman_optional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ tree --charset=ascii /opt/compiler-explorer/libs/beman_optional
```

we can use this to keep only ascii characters in this file.

Author: done

```yml
# Installed libs (see c++.amazon.properties for production examples)
libs=beman_optional                                                                            # The list of libraries separated by colons, e.g. beman_optional

libs.beman_optional.name=beman.optional                                                         # The name of the library.
libs.beman_optional.versions=trunk                                                              # The version of the library, always trunk for now.  
libs.beman_optional.url=https://github.com/bemanproject/optional                                # The URL of the library.
libs.beman_optional.versions.trunk.version=trunk                                                # The version of the library, always trunk for now.
libs.beman_optional.versions.trunk.path=/opt/compiler-explorer/libs/beman_optional/main/include # The path to the library.
```

  3.2. Start local deployment:

```bash
$ cd compiler-explorer/
$ make
...
info:   Listening on http://localhost:10240/
...
```

  3.3. Go to <http://localhost:10240/> and try to compile a code which includes your library, e.g.:

```cpp
#include <beman/optional/optional.hpp>

> int main() { return beman::optional<int>{}.empty(); }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
int main() { return beman::optional::optional<int>{}.empty(); }
```

Also, when testing I have some weird error, 

```
<source>:4:45: error: ‘struct beman::optional::optional<int>::empty’ is private within this context
```

> int main() { return beman::optional<int>{}.empty(); }

Author: ```suggestion
int main() { return beman::optional<int>{26}.value(); }
```

```

<img width="1725" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/afe0abd8-e92e-40c2-8843-7b7011092650" />

  3.4. Go to `Include libs`:

<img width="1727" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/102c5da5-d48d-4331-a741-4a5bbf5c607b" />

  3.5. Search for your library - e.g. `beman.optional` - and selected deployed version - e.g. `trunk`:

<img width="1723" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c2098e41-8cee-4cba-9d95-c1bfef2cb943" />

  3.6. Your local deployment is working!

<img width="1726" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/00ab62b6-011c-4490-923c-43ea83a2d4de" />

  3.7. Mirror changes from `etc/config/c++.local.properties` to `etc/config/c++.amazon.properties` (need to find the place to insert the new Beman library alongside the existing ones).

```bash

> compiler-explorer [main] $ cat etc/config/c++.amazon.properties | grep -A3 -B3 beman_optional

Author: ```suggestion
$ cat etc/config/c++.amazon.properties | grep -A3 -B3 beman_optional
```

  package_install: true
  method: nightlyclone
  repo: bemanproject/iterator_interface
  staticliblink:
  - beman.iterator_interface
  targets:
  - main
  type: github
...
beman_optional:
  build_type: none
```

Notes:

* `build_type: cmake`: Run a cmake command.
* `extra_cmake_arg:`: Pass arguments to cmake, e.g. disable building tests (`-DBUILD_TESTING=OFF`).
* `lib_type: static`: Generate a static library.
* `package_install: true`: Install build artifacts.

* Updates in `compiler-explorer/etc/config/c++.amazon.properties`:

```yaml
...
libs=...:beman_iterator_interface:beman_optional:...
...
libs.beman_iterator_interface.name=beman.iterator_interface
libs.beman_iterator_interface.versions=trunk
libs.beman_iterator_interface.url=https://github.com/bemanproject/iterator_interface
libs.beman_iterator_interface.packagedheaders=true
libs.beman_iterator_interface.staticliblink=beman.iterator_interface
libs.beman_iterator_interface.versions.trunk.version=trunk
libs.beman_iterator_interface.versions.trunk.lookupversion=main
...
```

* Same testing instructions as per [Integrating a header only library](#integrating-a-header-only-library).

## Non header-only library

> Currently, there are no such usages for such Beman libraries. 

Author: ```suggestion
Currently, there are no such usages inside The Beman Project. 
```
